Chapter 3 Passenger Compartment
3.1 Passenger Compartment Inspection Overview
The inspection of the vehicle’s passenger compartment shall consist of separate inspections of
items located in or on the passenger compartment to ensure they are functioning as designed
by the manufacturer. Those items, when equipped, include the windshield, windshield wiper(s),
mirrors, seats, seatbelts, child seat lower anchors and tethers (LATCH) system, rear window,
and a visual inspection of the Supplemental Restraint System (SRS). Licensed technicians shall
consult Division 12, Chapter 4 (Windshields and Mirrors – commencing at Section 26700), and
Chapter 5, Article 3 (Safety Belts and Inflatable Restraint Systems – commencing at Section
27302) of the Vehicle Code, Federal Motor Vehicle Standards (49 C.F.R.571.205 and 49 C.F.R.
571.212), and specific vehicle manufacturer specifications to ensure minimum inspection
standards for the windshield, mirrors, safety belts, and the inflatable restraint system are met.
3.2 Mirror Inspection
Every motor vehicle, including motorcycles, shall have mirrors installed on the vehicle as
originally equipped by the manufacturer. When inspecting the mirrors, the technician shall
ensure:
A. The vehicle or motorcycle mirrors are properly mounted in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
B. There are no objects, materials, damage, or deterioration of the mirror’s surface
obstructing the driver’s view to the rear of the vehicle or motorcycle.
C. All vehicle or motorcycle mirrors maintain a fixed position when adjusted.
3.2 Windshield and Rear Window Inspection
Windshields provide structural support to the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle in the
event of a front-end collision or vehicle roll-over. Every passenger vehicle, other than a
motorcycle, shall be equipped with a windshield that meets or may exceed Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards (49 C.F.R. 571.205 and 49 C.F.R. 571.212). It is unlawful to operate
any motor vehicle when the windshield or rear window is in such defective condition that it
impairs the driver’s vision either to the front or rear of the vehicle. When inspecting the
windshield and rear window the technician shall ensure:
A. There are no cracks in the windshield which can negatively impact its structural support
in the event of a front-end collision or vehicle rollover.
B. The driver's view of the road through the windshield and rear window is not impaired by:
• Delamination of windshield
• Damage to or deterioration of the glass surface
DRAFT VSSI Manual 2023 16
• Objects or materials placed, displayed, installed, applied or affixed to the glass
surface, unless permitted by Section 27608 of the Vehicle Code.
C. If a motorcycle is equipped with a front windshield that extends into the rider’s field of
vision, the technician shall inspect it to ensure the rider’s view of the road is not impaired
by damage to or deterioration of the windshield surface.
3.4 Windshield Wiper System Inspection
Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles, equipped with a windshield shall also be equipped
with a self-operating windshield wiper system. When inspecting the windshield wipers, the
technician shall ensure:
A. The wiper(s) activate and operate as designed by the vehicle manufacturer.
B. The wiper blade(s) are properly installed and free of any visual defects.
3.5 Seat Inspection
The technician shall verify that the seat(s) are securely fastened to the vehicle, all necessary
mounting hardware is present, and both the upper and lower portions of the seat(s) maintain a
fixed position when adjusted.
3.6 Seatbelt Inspection
All passenger vehicles built after January 1, 1968, except motorcycles, shall have a seatbelt for
each seating position, including seating positions for wheelchairs when equipped with a
wheelchair tie-down and occupant restraint system. When inspecting the seatbelts, the
technician shall verify each seatbelt has the minimum number of factory attachment points in
accordance with manufacturer specifications, and manually operate each seatbelt to ensure
that:
A. The seatbelt fabric webbing and/or stitching is not cut, frayed, or torn.
B. The seatbelt buckle easily buckles and unbuckles to and from the seatbelt latch and
stays buckled when the webbing is pulled outward from the buckle.
C. If applicable, 3-point (lap and shoulder), and 2-point (lap) seatbelts with automatic
retracting mechanisms smoothly extend and fully retract to and from the spool.
D. Seatbelt spools with locking mechanism lock when the seatbelt webbing is suddenly
pulled outward from the spool.
If equipped with a seatbelt warning light and/or seatbelt alarm, the light and/or alarm must be
functioning as designed by the manufacturer.
DRAFT VSSI Manual 2023 17
3.7 Child Seat LATCH System Inspection
When a vehicle is equipped with a LATCH system the technician shall inspect the brackets
and/or anchors to ensure that the system components are present, undamaged, and securely
fastened.
3.8 SRS Component Visual Inspection
In an SRS equipped vehicle, the technician shall visually inspect SRS components that can be
seen from inside the passenger compartment, without any disassembly, to ensure the air bags
and seat belt/retractor pre-tensioners are present, and properly installed. The technician shall
inspect:
A. The air bag covers for any tears, unevenness, inconsistent appearance, or evidence of
refinishing, which would indicate the air bag was previously deployed and repaired.
B. The seat belt/retractor pre-tensioner assemblies for any melted, broken, or chemical
discharge stains on housings indicating the pre-tensioner was previously deployed.
3.9 SRS Warning Light Inspection
If the vehicle is equipped with SRS, the technician shall verify that the dashboard warning light:
A. Illuminates when the key is turned to the ignition on - engine off position. This “bulbcheck” allows for verification that the bulb is functional, but the bulb should turn off after
the engine is started.
B. Does not stay illuminated after the bulb-check. If the light stays illuminated after the bulbcheck, that is an indication of a system malfunction.
Do Not Certify when:
• Any of the vehicle mirrors, as originally equipped by the vehicle manufacturer, are
missing, damaged, are not mounted in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications, or have a damaged or deteriorated surface that obstructs the driver’s view
to the rear of the vehicle.
• The vehicle mirrors will not maintain a fixed position when adjusted.
• There are chips, obstruction, or surface deterioration in the windshield or rear glass that
obstructs the driver’s field of vision and view of the road.
• The windshield on a motor vehicle is cracked
• The windshield does not meet the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (49 C.F.R.
571.205 and 49 C.F.R. 571.212).
DRAFT VSSI Manual 2023 18
• The windshield wipers are inoperative, do not operate as designed by manufacturer, or
the wiper blade(s) are found to have visual defects.
• Any seatbelt:
o Does not have the minimum number of factory attachment points according to
manufacturer’s specifications.
o Required for a seating position is missing.
o Does not extend, fully retract, and/or lock as designed by the manufacturer.
o Fabric webbing and/or stitching is damaged.
o Cannot be buckled or unbuckled.
o Warning light and/or alarm are not functioning properly.
• Any seat(s) installed in the vehicle is/are not securely fastened to the vehicle, and/or the
upper and lower portions of the seat(s) do not maintain a fixed position.
• The LATCH system bracket and/or anchors are missing, not securely fastened, or
damaged.
• Any air bag, that can be inspected without disassembly, appears to have been
previously deployed based upon the visual inspection detailed in Section 3.8.
• Any seat belt/retractor pre-tensioner, that can be inspected without disassembly,
appears to have been previously deployed based upon the visual inspection detailed in
Section 3.8.
• The SRS warning light does not “bulb-check” or stays illuminated