Potatoes with rosemary and sea salt:
A great marriage is one where each person, without agenda, celebrates the unique and distinctive characteristics of the other, and lovingly helps them be the best possible version of themselves. When I see a couple who express this in their relationship I am always moved and inspired, because they are so much more together than they could possibly be individually. In my world I have a number of friends whose marriages have worked out this principle for many years and each day they bring joy to each other, and those in their sphere of influence.
rosemary4 resized
In a very roundabout way, this is an introduction to the marriage of ingredients and this recipe. Tomatoes and basil, chocolate and coffee, peas and mint are ingredients that belong together, and, when paired in a recipe with love, care and a little finesse, bring out the very best in each other while still maintaining their individual and distinctive flavours. Potatoes and rosemary are another such pairing, and in this simple, simple recipe bring out the absolute best in each other. It’s a perfect accompaniment to grilled meat or fish and salad. You can easily increase the quantities in this recipe to feed a crowd – it really just depends on the size of your biggest baking dish and the size of your oven!
Ingredients: (serves 4 – 6)
8 medium sized red-skinned potatoes
1 tablespoon good olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 sprigs of fresh rosemary
Preheat oven to 180 C. Using a mandolin slice the potatoes very thinly. Place in a medium sized glass bowl and cover with cold water. Let sit for about 20 minutes then drain and dry well with a tea towel. Pick the leaves off the rosemary and place in the base of a 20 cm round or 18 cm square dish. This enables their earthy flavour to infuse the potatoes as they cook and keeps them from burning and becoming bitter. Stack the potato slices in the dish, quite tightly. They will shrink a little as they cook. Drizzle with the olive oil and season well with sea salt and black pepper. Bake for 45 – 55 minutes, until the potatoes are golden and crispy around the edges. Serve immediately.
Tiramisu:
Far from being the traditional Italian dessert you assume it is, tiramisu is actually a fairly recent invention. It seems it first appeared in a recipe book as late as 1981, and was created in the 1950s at the earliest. Like most recipe origin stories, sources disagree over who should take the credit, but most agree it originated in the northern town of Treviso. You can read about it in this article in The Guardian, How to make the perfect Tiramisu and this one from the Washington Post, The trail of tiramisu
All I want to say is that if made well, a trifle of sponge fingers, coffee, liqueur, a light yet rich creamy filling and chocolate is a glorious thing, and I love it! My recipe tries to balance richness and lightness with the addition of a couple whipped egg whites in the cream layer. I also advocate not soaking the sponge fingers until they are soggy and giving several hours in the fridge for the flavours to combine and the texture to be just right – fluffy, not gluggy; creamy rather than stodgy; and with just the right sparkle from the coffee.
Ingredients:
16-24 savoiardi (depending on size)
1 double shot espresso mixed with 80 ml hot water
2 tablespoons marsala, frangelico or brandy
250 g mascarpone
300 ml pure cream
1/4 cup caster sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 egg whites
1 teaspoon best quality dutch-process cocoa
In a clean bowl whisk the egg whites until they form soft peaks. Set aside and in another medium sized bowl beat the mascarpone, cream, sugar and vanilla until the mixture creates soft peaks. Carefully fold the egg whites into the cream mixture, so as not to knock air out of the egg whites. Mix the coffee with the liqueur and place in a shallow dish. Dip the savoiardi on both sides quickly in the coffee and liqueur and make a layer in the bottom of a a glass serving bowl (approx. 20 cm diameter). Cover with 1/3 of the cream mixture, and repeat twice more, finishing with a cream layer. Dust the top with the cocoa, cover and place in the refrigerator for several hours.